.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 by Kevin B. Kenny.
.\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\"
.TH NRE 3 8.6 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.\" The -*- nroff -*- definitions below are for supplemental macros used
.\" in Tcl/Tk manual entries.
.\"
.\" .AP type name in/out ?indent?
.\"	Start paragraph describing an argument to a library procedure.
.\"	type is type of argument (int, etc.), in/out is either "in", "out",
.\"	or "in/out" to describe whether procedure reads or modifies arg,
.\"	and indent is equivalent to second arg of .IP (shouldn't ever be
.\"	needed;  use .AS below instead)
.\"
.\" .AS ?type? ?name?
.\"	Give maximum sizes of arguments for setting tab stops.  Type and
.\"	name are examples of largest possible arguments that will be passed
.\"	to .AP later.  If args are omitted, default tab stops are used.
.\"
.\" .BS
.\"	Start box enclosure.  From here until next .BE, everything will be
.\"	enclosed in one large box.
.\"
.\" .BE
.\"	End of box enclosure.
.\"
.\" .CS
.\"	Begin code excerpt.
.\"
.\" .CE
.\"	End code excerpt.
.\"
.\" .VS ?version? ?br?
.\"	Begin vertical sidebar, for use in marking newly-changed parts
.\"	of man pages.  The first argument is ignored and used for recording
.\"	the version when the .VS was added, so that the sidebars can be
.\"	found and removed when they reach a certain age.  If another argument
.\"	is present, then a line break is forced before starting the sidebar.
.\"
.\" .VE
.\"	End of vertical sidebar.
.\"
.\" .DS
.\"	Begin an indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .DE
.\"	End of indented unfilled display.
.\"
.\" .SO ?manpage?
.\"	Start of list of standard options for a Tk widget. The manpage
.\"	argument defines where to look up the standard options; if
.\"	omitted, defaults to "options". The options follow on successive
.\"	lines, in three columns separated by tabs.
.\"
.\" .SE
.\"	End of list of standard options for a Tk widget.
.\"
.\" .OP cmdName dbName dbClass
.\"	Start of description of a specific option.  cmdName gives the
.\"	option's name as specified in the class command, dbName gives
.\"	the option's name in the option database, and dbClass gives
.\"	the option's class in the option database.
.\"
.\" .UL arg1 arg2
.\"	Print arg1 underlined, then print arg2 normally.
.\"
.\" .QW arg1 ?arg2?
.\"	Print arg1 in quotes, then arg2 normally (for trailing punctuation).
.\"
.\" .PQ arg1 ?arg2?
.\"	Print an open parenthesis, arg1 in quotes, then arg2 normally
.\"	(for trailing punctuation) and then a closing parenthesis.
.\"
.\"	# Set up traps and other miscellaneous stuff for Tcl/Tk man pages.
.if t .wh -1.3i ^B
.nr ^l \n(.l
.ad b
.\"	# Start an argument description
.de AP
.ie !"\\$4"" .TP \\$4
.el \{\
.   ie !"\\$2"" .TP \\n()Cu
.   el          .TP 15
.\}
.ta \\n()Au \\n()Bu
.ie !"\\$3"" \{\
\&\\$1 \\fI\\$2\\fP (\\$3)
.\".b
.\}
.el \{\
.br
.ie !"\\$2"" \{\
\&\\$1	\\fI\\$2\\fP
.\}
.el \{\
\&\\fI\\$1\\fP
.\}
.\}
..
.\"	# define tabbing values for .AP
.de AS
.nr )A 10n
.if !"\\$1"" .nr )A \\w'\\$1'u+3n
.nr )B \\n()Au+15n
.\"
.if !"\\$2"" .nr )B \\w'\\$2'u+\\n()Au+3n
.nr )C \\n()Bu+\\w'(in/out)'u+2n
..
.AS Tcl_Interp Tcl_CreateInterp in/out
.\"	# BS - start boxed text
.\"	# ^y = starting y location
.\"	# ^b = 1
.de BS
.br
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 1u
.if n .nf
.if n .ti 0
.if n \l'\\n(.lu\(ul'
.if n .fi
..
.\"	# BE - end boxed text (draw box now)
.de BE
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
.ie n \l'\\n(^lu\(ul'
.el \{\
.\"	Draw four-sided box normally, but don't draw top of
.\"	box if the box started on an earlier page.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \{\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.el \}\
\h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\l'|0u-1.5n\(ul'
.\}
.\}
.fi
.br
.nr ^b 0
..
.\"	# VS - start vertical sidebar
.\"	# ^Y = starting y location
.\"	# ^v = 1 (for troff;  for nroff this doesn't matter)
.de VS
.if !"\\$2"" .br
.mk ^Y
.ie n 'mc \s12\(br\s0
.el .nr ^v 1u
..
.\"	# VE - end of vertical sidebar
.de VE
.ie n 'mc
.el \{\
.ev 2
.nf
.ti 0
.mk ^t
\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\L'|\\n(^Yu-1v\(bv'\v'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu'\h'-|\\n(^lu+3n'
.sp -1
.fi
.ev
.\}
.nr ^v 0
..
.\"	# Special macro to handle page bottom:  finish off current
.\"	# box/sidebar if in box/sidebar mode, then invoked standard
.\"	# page bottom macro.
.de ^B
.ev 2
'ti 0
'nf
.mk ^t
.if \\n(^b \{\
.\"	Draw three-sided box if this is the box's first page,
.\"	draw two sides but no top otherwise.
.ie !\\n(^b-1 \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\l'\\n(^lu+3n\(ul'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.el \h'-1.5n'\L'|\\n(^yu-1v'\h'\\n(^lu+3n'\L'\\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^yu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.nr ^x \\n(^tu+1v-\\n(^Yu
\kx\h'-\\nxu'\h'|\\n(^lu+3n'\ky\L'-\\n(^xu'\v'\\n(^xu'\h'|0u'\c
.\}
.bp
'fi
.ev
.if \\n(^b \{\
.mk ^y
.nr ^b 2
.\}
.if \\n(^v \{\
.mk ^Y
.\}
..
.\"	# DS - begin display
.de DS
.RS
.nf
.sp
..
.\"	# DE - end display
.de DE
.fi
.RE
.sp
..
.\"	# SO - start of list of standard options
.de SO
'ie '\\$1'' .ds So \\fBoptions\\fR
'el .ds So \\fB\\$1\\fR
.SH "STANDARD OPTIONS"
.LP
.nf
.ta 5.5c 11c
.ft B
..
.\"	# SE - end of list of standard options
.de SE
.fi
.ft R
.LP
See the \\*(So manual entry for details on the standard options.
..
.\"	# OP - start of full description for a single option
.de OP
.LP
.nf
.ta 4c
Command-Line Name:	\\fB\\$1\\fR
Database Name:	\\fB\\$2\\fR
Database Class:	\\fB\\$3\\fR
.fi
.IP
..
.\"	# CS - begin code excerpt
.de CS
.RS
.nf
.ta .25i .5i .75i 1i
..
.\"	# CE - end code excerpt
.de CE
.fi
.RE
..
.\"	# UL - underline word
.de UL
\\$1\l'|0\(ul'\\$2
..
.\"	# QW - apply quotation marks to word
.de QW
.ie '\\*(lq'"' ``\\$1''\\$2
.\"" fix emacs highlighting
.el \\*(lq\\$1\\*(rq\\$2
..
.\"	# PQ - apply parens and quotation marks to word
.de PQ
.ie '\\*(lq'"' (``\\$1''\\$2)\\$3
.\"" fix emacs highlighting
.el (\\*(lq\\$1\\*(rq\\$2)\\$3
..
.\"	# QR - quoted range
.de QR
.ie '\\*(lq'"' ``\\$1''\\-``\\$2''\\$3
.\"" fix emacs highlighting
.el \\*(lq\\$1\\*(rq\\-\\*(lq\\$2\\*(rq\\$3
..
.\"	# MT - "empty" string
.de MT
.QW ""
..
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_NRCreateCommand, Tcl_NRCallObjProc, Tcl_NREvalObj, Tcl_NREvalObjv, Tcl_NRCmdSwap, Tcl_NRExprObj, Tcl_NRAddCallback \- Non-Recursive (stackless) evaluation of Tcl scripts.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
Tcl_Command
\fBTcl_NRCreateCommand\fR(\fIinterp, cmdName, proc, nreProc, clientData,
                    deleteProc\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_NRCallObjProc\fR(\fIinterp, nreProc, clientData, objc, objv\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_NREvalObj\fR(\fIinterp, objPtr, flags\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_NREvalObjv\fR(\fIinterp, objc, objv, flags\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_NRCmdSwap\fR(\fIinterp, cmd, objc, objv, flags\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_NRExprObj\fR(\fIinterp, objPtr, resultPtr\fR)
.sp
void
\fBTcl_NRAddCallback\fR(\fIinterp, postProcPtr, data0, data1, data2, data3\fR)
.fi
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_CmdDeleteProc *interp in
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter in which to create or evaluate a command.
.AP char *cmdName in
Name of a new command to create.
.AP Tcl_ObjCmdProc *proc in
Implementation of a command that will be called whenever \fIcmdName\fR
is invoked as a command in the unoptimized way.
.AP Tcl_ObjCmdProc *nreProc in
Implementation of a command that will be called whenever \fIcmdName\fR
is invoked and requested to conserve the C stack.
.AP ClientData clientData in
Arbitrary one-word value that will be passed to \fIproc\fR, \fInreProc\fR,
\fIdeleteProc\fR and \fIobjProc\fR.
.AP Tcl_CmdDeleteProc *deleteProc in/out
Procedure to call before \fIcmdName\fR is deleted from the interpreter.
This procedure allows for command-specific cleanup. If \fIdeleteProc\fR
is \fBNULL\fR, then no procedure is called before the command is deleted.
.AP int objc in
Count of parameters provided to the implementation of a command.
.AP Tcl_Obj **objv in
Pointer to an array of Tcl values. Each value holds the value of a
single word in the command to execute.
.AP Tcl_Obj *objPtr in
Pointer to a Tcl_Obj whose value is a script or expression to execute.
.AP int flags in
ORed combination of flag bits that specify additional options.
\fBTCL_EVAL_GLOBAL\fR is the only flag that is currently supported.
.\" TODO: This is a lie. But kbk didn't grasp TCL_EVAL_INVOKE and
.\"       TCL_EVAL_NOERR well enough to document them.
.AP Tcl_Command cmd in
Token for a command that is to be used instead of the currently
executing command.
.AP Tcl_Obj *resultPtr out
Pointer to an unshared Tcl_Obj where the result of expression
evaluation is written.
.AP Tcl_NRPostProc *postProcPtr in
Pointer to a function that will be invoked when the command currently
executing in the interpreter designated by \fIinterp\fR completes.
.AP ClientData data0 in
.AP ClientData data1 in
.AP ClientData data2 in
.AP ClientData data3 in
\fIdata0\fR through \fIdata3\fR are four one-word values that will be passed
to the function designated by \fIpostProcPtr\fR when it is invoked.
.BE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This series of C functions provides an interface whereby commands that
are implemented in C can be evaluated, and invoke Tcl commands scripts
and scripts, without consuming space on the C stack. The non-recursive
evaluation is done by installing a \fItrampoline\fR, a small piece of
code that invokes a command or script, and then executes a series of
callbacks when the command or script returns.
.PP
The \fBTcl_NRCreateCommand\fR function creates a Tcl command in the
interpreter designated by \fIinterp\fR that is prepared to handle
nonrecursive evaluation with a trampoline. The \fIcmdName\fR argument
gives the name of the new command. If \fIcmdName\fR contains any
namespace qualifiers, then the new command is added to the specified
namespace; otherwise, it is added to the global namespace. \fIproc\fR
gives the procedure that will be called when the interpreter wishes to
evaluate the command in an unoptimized manner, and \fInreProc\fR is
the procedure that will be called when the interpreter wishes to
evaluate the command using a trampoline. \fIdeleteProc\fR is a
function that will be called before the command is deleted from the
interpreter. When any of the three functions is invoked, it is passed
the \fIclientData\fR parameter.
.PP
\fBTcl_NRCreateCommand\fR deletes any existing command
\fIname\fR already associated with the interpreter
(however see below for an exception where the existing command
is not deleted).
It returns a token that may be used to refer
to the command in subsequent calls to \fBTcl_GetCommandName\fR.
If \fBTcl_NRCreateCommand\fR is called for an interpreter that is in
the process of being deleted, then it does not create a new command,
does not delete any existing command of the same name, and returns NULL.
.PP
The \fIproc\fR and \fInreProc\fR function are expected to conform to
all the rules set forth for the \fIproc\fR argument to
\fBTcl_CreateObjCommand\fR(3) (\fIq.v.\fR).
.PP
When a command that is written to cope with evaluation via trampoline
is invoked without a trampoline on the stack, it will usually respond
to the invocation by creating a trampoline and calling the
trampoline-enabled implementation of the same command. This call is done by
means of \fBTcl_NRCallObjProc\fR. In the call to
\fBTcl_NRCallObjProc\fR, the \fIinterp\fR, \fIclientData\fR,
\fIobjc\fR and \fIobjv\fR parameters should be the same ones that were
passed to \fIproc\fR. The \fInreProc\fR parameter should designate the
trampoline-enabled implementation of the command.
.PP
\fBTcl_NREvalObj\fR arranges for the script contained in \fIobjPtr\fR
to be evaluated in the interpreter designated by \fIinterp\fR after
the current command (which must be trampoline-enabled) returns. It is
the method by which a command may invoke a script without consuming
space on the C stack. Similarly, \fBTcl_NREvalObjv\fR arranges to
invoke a single Tcl command whose words have already been separated
and substituted. The \fIobjc\fR and \fIobjv\fR parameters give the
words of the command to be evaluated when execution reaches the
trampoline.
.PP
\fBTcl_NRCmdSwap\fR allows for trampoline evaluation of a command whose
resolution is already known.  The \fIcmd\fR parameter gives a
\fBTcl_Command\fR token (returned from \fBTcl_CreateObjCommand\fR or
\fBTcl_GetCommandFromObj\fR) identifying the command to be invoked in
the trampoline; this command must match the word in \fIobjv[0]\fR.
The remaining arguments are as for \fBTcl_NREvalObjv\fR.
.PP
\fBTcl_NREvalObj\fR, \fBTcl_NREvalObjv\fR and \fBTcl_NRCmdSwap\fR
all accept a \fIflags\fR parameter, which is an OR-ed-together set of
bits to control evaluation. At the present time, the only supported flag
available to callers is \fBTCL_EVAL_GLOBAL\fR.
.\" TODO: Again, this is a lie. Do we want to explain TCL_EVAL_INVOKE
.\"       and TCL_EVAL_NOERR?
If the \fBTCL_EVAL_GLOBAL\fR flag is set, the script or command is
evaluated in the global namespace. If it is not set, it is evaluated
in the current namespace.
.PP
\fBTcl_NRExprObj\fR arranges for the expression contained in \fIobjPtr\fR
to be evaluated in the interpreter designated by \fIinterp\fR after
the current command (which must be trampoline-enabled) returns. It is
the method by which a command may evaluate a Tcl expression without consuming
space on the C stack.  The argument \fIresultPtr\fR is a pointer to an
unshared Tcl_Obj where the result of expression evaluation is to be written.
If expression evaluation returns any code other than TCL_OK, the
\fIresultPtr\fR value is left untouched.
.PP
All of the routines return \fBTCL_OK\fR if command or expression invocation
has been scheduled successfully. If for any reason the scheduling cannot
be completed (for example, if the interpreter is unable to find
the requested command), they return \fBTCL_ERROR\fR with an
appropriate message left in the interpreter's result.
.PP
\fBTcl_NRAddCallback\fR arranges to have a C function called when the
current trampoline-enabled command in the Tcl interpreter designated
by \fIinterp\fR returns.  The \fIpostProcPtr\fR argument is a pointer
to the callback function, which must have arguments and return value
consistent with the \fBTcl_NRPostProc\fR data type:
.PP
.CS
typedef int
\fBTcl_NRPostProc\fR(
        \fBClientData\fR \fIdata\fR[],
        \fBTcl_Interp\fR *\fIinterp\fR,
        int \fIresult\fR);
.CE
.PP
When the trampoline invokes the callback function, the \fIdata\fR
parameter will point to an array containing the four one-word
quantities that were passed to \fBTcl_NRAddCallback\fR in the
\fIdata0\fR through \fIdata3\fR parameters. The Tcl interpreter will
be designated by the \fIinterp\fR parameter, and the \fIresult\fR
parameter will contain the result (\fBTCL_OK\fR, \fBTCL_ERROR\fR,
\fBTCL_RETURN\fR, \fBTCL_BREAK\fR or \fBTCL_CONTINUE\fR) that was
returned by the command evaluation. The callback function is expected,
in turn, either to return a \fIresult\fR to control further evaluation.
.PP
Multiple \fBTcl_NRAddCallback\fR invocations may request multiple
callbacks, which may be to the same or different callback
functions. If multiple callbacks are requested, they are executed in
last-in, first-out order, that is, the most recently requested
callback is executed first.
.SH EXAMPLE
.PP
The usual pattern for Tcl commands that invoke other Tcl commands
is something like:
.PP
.CS
int
\fITheCmdOldObjProc\fR(
    ClientData clientData,
    Tcl_Interp *interp,
    int objc,
    Tcl_Obj *const objv[])
{
    int result;
    Tcl_Obj *objPtr;

    \fI... preparation ...\fR

    result = \fBTcl_EvalObjEx\fR(interp, objPtr, 0);

    \fI... postprocessing ...\fR

    return result;
}
\fBTcl_CreateObjCommand\fR(interp, "theCommand",
        \fITheCmdOldObjProc\fR, clientData, TheCmdDeleteProc);
.CE
.PP
To enable a command like this one for trampoline-based evaluation,
it must be split into three pieces:
.IP \(bu
A non-trampoline implementation, \fITheCmdNewObjProc\fR,
which will simply create a trampoline
and invoke the trampoline-based implementation.
.IP \(bu
A trampoline-enabled implementation, \fITheCmdNRObjProc\fR.  This
function will perform the initialization, request that the trampoline
call the postprocessing routine after command evaluation, and finally,
request that the trampoline call the inner command.
.IP \(bu
A postprocessing routine, \fITheCmdPostProc\fR. This function will
perform the postprocessing formerly done after the return from the
inner command in \fITheCmdObjProc\fR.
.PP
The non-trampoline implementation is simple and stylized, containing
a single statement:
.PP
.CS
int
\fITheCmdNewObjProc\fR(
    ClientData clientData,
    Tcl_Interp *interp,
    int objc,
    Tcl_Obj *const objv[])
{
    return \fBTcl_NRCallObjProc\fR(interp, \fITheCmdNRObjProc\fR,
            clientData, objc, objv);
}
.CE
.PP
The trampoline-enabled implementation requests postprocessing,
and returns to the trampoline requesting command evaluation.
.PP
.CS
int
\fITheCmdNRObjProc\fR
    ClientData clientData,
    Tcl_Interp *interp,
    int objc,
    Tcl_Obj *const objv[])
{
    Tcl_Obj *objPtr;

    \fI... preparation ...\fR

    \fBTcl_NRAddCallback\fR(interp, \fITheCmdPostProc\fR,
            data0, data1, data2, data3);
    /* \fIdata0 .. data3\fR are up to four one-word items to
     * pass to the postprocessing procedure */

    return \fBTcl_NREvalObj\fR(interp, objPtr, 0);
}
.CE
.PP
The postprocessing procedure does whatever the original command did
upon return from the inner evaluation.
.PP
.CS
int
\fITheCmdNRPostProc\fR(
    ClientData data[],
    Tcl_Interp *interp,
    int result)
{
    /* \fIdata[0] .. data[3]\fR are the four words of data
     * passed to \fBTcl_NRAddCallback\fR */

    \fI... postprocessing ...\fR

    return result;
}
.CE
.PP
If \fItheCommand\fR is a command that results in multiple commands or
scripts being evaluated, its postprocessing routine may schedule
additional postprocessing and then request another command evaluation
by means of \fBTcl_NREvalObj\fR or one of the other evaluation
routines. Looping and sequencing constructs may be implemented in this way.
.PP
Finally, to install a trampoline-enabled command in the interpreter,
\fBTcl_NRCreateCommand\fR is used in place of
\fBTcl_CreateObjCommand\fR.  It accepts two command procedures instead
of one. The first is for use when no trampoline is yet on the stack,
and the second is for use when there is already a trampoline in place.
.PP
.CS
\fBTcl_NRCreateCommand\fR(interp, "theCommand",
        \fITheCmdNewObjProc\fR, \fITheCmdNRObjProc\fR, clientData,
        TheCmdDeleteProc);
.CE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Tcl_CreateCommand(3), Tcl_CreateObjCommand(3), Tcl_EvalObjEx(3), Tcl_GetCommandFromObj(3), Tcl_ExprObj(3)
.SH KEYWORDS
stackless, nonrecursive, execute, command, global, value, result, script
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2008 by Kevin B. Kenny
